NEW: Dependency config design and content (#2812)
IMAP-Science-Operations-Center/imap_processing: docs/source/data-access/data-dependency.rst

Overview
--------

When a file lands in the SDC, it is added to our data bucket (Also called S3 or S3 bucket.)
This bucket, as the name implies, is a simple collection which contains all the files in the
SDC, organized like a file system.

Each data file is put into a specific subfolder depending on the file name. For example,
a file named ``imap_swe_l0_sci_20240105_20240105_v00-01.pkts`` would be placed in the
``imap/swe/l0/2024/01`` folder. More information about the naming conventions can be
found in :ref:`naming-conventions`.

> When a file of any level arrives in the bucket, it triggers the rest of processing. This is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a file of any level arrives in the bucket, it triggers downstream processing. This is
```

    processing of the downstream files. For example, an L2 file is a downstream dependency
    of an L1 file. An "upstream dependency" is the opposite, describing a file which is required
    to begin processing the current file. For example, an L1 file is an upstream dependency of an
    L2 file.

Detailed Description of File Processing
---------------------------------------

For explicit descriptions of the tools and technical choices of the IMAP SDC, please refer to
`this Galaxy page <https://lasp.colorado.edu/galaxy/display/IMAP/SDC+Architecture>`_.
This section is intended to act as a high level overview for the data processing architecture of
the IMAP SDC, in less technical terms.

.. image:: ../_static/architecture_overview.png

`Up to date overview chart in Galaxy <https://lasp.colorado.edu/galaxy/display/IMAP/SDC+Processing+Architecture+Overview>`_

Each science file that arrives is treated the same, regardless of level or instrument. When a file
is placed in the file storage system, it triggers a step to index the file ("indexer lambda").
This step adds the file to the database and triggers the next step in processing ("batch starter lambda").

> This step is what determines if a instrument and level is ready for processing, by checking dependencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After indexing, the batch starter lambda is triggered in order to determine what jobs may be ready for processing.
```

> For each file that arrives, the system checks to see what the downstream dependencies are -
> meaning, what future files need this file in order to complete processing. For example, if a MAG L1A
> file arrived, this step would determine that the MAG L1B ``mago`` and ``magi`` files are dependent on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each file that arrives, the system checks to see what jobs may need to be run by looking at the downstream dependencies are. For example, if a MAG L1A
file arrived, this step would determine that the MAG L1B ``mago`` and ``magi`` files are dependent on
```

the L1A file, and therefore MAG L1B may be ready to begin processing.

> Then, for each anticipated job, the batch starter process checks to see if all the upstream

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, for each possible job, the batch starter process checks to see if all the upstream
```

dependencies are met. Although we know we have one of the upstream dependencies for an
expected job, it's possible that there are other required dependencies that have not yet
arrived. If we are missing any required dependencies, then the system does not kick off the

> processing job. When the missing file arrives, it will trigger the same process of checking

Reviewer: ```suggestion
processing job. When the missing upstream dependency arrives, it will trigger the same process of checking
```

for all upstream dependencies. This time all required dependencies will be found and the
processing job will be started.

For example, SWAPI L3 requires both SWAPI L2 files and MAG L1D (previously called L2pre)
files. The SWAPI L2 job and the MAG L1D job are run independently, so there is no guarantee
that they will finish at the same time. Let's assume that the MAG L1D job finishes first,
since it is the lower level. When that file arrives, one of the downstream dependencies is
going to be the SWAPI L3 processing. However, when batch starter checks the upstream
dependencies for SWAPI L3, it will find that SWAPI L2 is missing. Therefore, processing
won't start. Once the SWAPI L2 processing finishes, and the SWAPI L2 file arrives, the batch
starter is triggered with that file. Once again, SWAPI L3 is a downstream dependency, but
this time, both upstream dependencies for SWAPI L2 are present. Therefore, processing for
SWAPI L3 can begin.

> The status of different files is recorded in the status tracking table. This table records
> the status of each anticipated output file as "in progress", "complete", or "failed." Through
> this, we can track processing for specific files and determine if a file exists quickly.

Reviewer: I think this is talking about the `ProcessingJob` table right?
```suggestion
The status of each job is recorded in the status tracking table as "in progress", "complete", or "failed." Through this, we can track processing for specific files and determine if a file exists quickly.
```

I think that one piece that we are missing is checking for upstream dependencies that have jobs that are "in progress". I have added such a check to the Hi Goodtimes special handling. The idea is to avoid race conditions where multiple jobs for the same product get triggered in fast succession.

Dependency Config File
----------------------

How does the SDC track which files are dependent on others? In order to decide what the
downstream or upstream dependencies of a file are, and what the nature of those dependencies
are, we need some way to request the upstream or downstream dependencies of a given file.
The current dependencies between instruments are recorded in `sds-data-manager Repo

> <https://github.com/IMAP-Science-Operations-Center/sds-data-manager/blob/dev/sds_data_manager/lambda_code/SDSCode/pipeline_lambdas/dependency_config.csv>`_.

Reviewer 2: Fix link - still points to CSV, not to YAMLs

Author: Good catch! I will update this link later when are close to done.

- ``ancillary``

> Upstream Product Name

Reviewer: I personally like `Descriptor` better for this. I think that product name has several possible meanings.

Author: cool. Then let's keep descriptor and I will make remaining changes.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Upstream product name can be one of the following:

- For science or ancillary data, the product names are defined by the instrument and SDC.

> - For ``spice`` data types, ``historical`` and ``best`` are the valid product names.

Reviewer: What about predict? I specify Hi spice dependencies individually for example: 
```
ephemeris_reconstructed, spice, historical, hi, l1c, 45sensor-pset, HARD_NO_TRIGGER, DOWNSTREAM
ephemeris_predicted, spice, best, hi, l1c, 45sensor-pset, HARD_NO_TRIGGER, DOWNSTREAM
```

Author: we had intension of using 'best' at one time but may be we didn't enforce it. We can remove that option.

- For ``spin`` and ``repoint`` data types, ``historical`` is the only valid product name.

Required (Optional)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Default:** ``true``

Whether the upstream dependency is required for processing the current product to begin.
If set to true, the product cannot be processed until this dependency is available.
If set to false, the product can be processed even if this dependency is missing.

> Kickoff_job (Optional)

Reviewer: My nitpick on terminology: It seems like we use trigger more widely.
```suggestion
Trigger_job (Optional)
```

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Default:** ``true``

Whether the arrival of this upstream dependency should trigger a processing job.
There are cases where we do not want to start a job when certain upstream data arrives.
For example, upstream inputs such as spacecraft clock or leapseconds data should not change
frequently, and processing jobs should not be triggered every time these files are updated.
Setting this to false allows for more controlled processing and may require additional
review before updating these types of dependencies.

(Past_days, Future_days) (Optional)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Default:**

- ENA and GLOWS: ``(0p, 0p)``
- Rest of in-situ instruments: ``(0d, 0d)``

Most science files are produced daily or per pointing. Due to this cadence, the default is
daily for most in-situ instruments and per pointing for ENA and GLOWS instruments. However,
this feature provides flexibility to query for upstream data beyond the daily date range of
the current product.

Supported values for past_days and future_days fields:

- ``p`` - pointing
- ``h`` - hourly
- ``d`` - days

> - ``l`` - last_processed

Author: similar to last_processed, we need nearest in the past.

But Hi wants nearest 7 irrespective of past or future.

Author: options:
past_nearest, future_nearest, any_nearest.

or
(7p) - this means any future or past data.
(1n, 0n) - this means get me last nearest data from past.

What to do if hi science file event comes and then need to looks up for SWE dependency which is daily?
pointing number 9 file came, we look nearest 7 files, then derive date range using earlier and latest pointing id of that 7 files and look data range from the pointing table. Then use date range to query for SPICE and other dependency. If dependency is found,

Author: one class for daily and pointing. Then parent class can be inherit those as needed for ENA or not.

File content structure
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
The YAML config has the following structure:

.. code-block:: yaml

  (level, product_name):
    - (
      upstream_source,
      upstream_data_type,
      upstream_product_name,
      required(bool),
      kickoff_job(bool),
      (past_days, future_days)
    )
    - (
      upstream_source,
      upstream_data_type,
      upstream_product_name,
      required(bool),
      kickoff_job(bool),
      (past_days, future_days)
    )
    ....

File content Example
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**imap_hit_dependencies.yaml**

.. code-block:: yaml

  (l1a, all):
    - (hit, l0, raw)
    - (leapseconds, spice, historical)
    - (spacecraft_clock, spice, historical)
  (l1b, hk):
    - (hit, l0, raw)
    - (leapseconds, spice, historical)
    - (spacecraft_clock, spice, historical)
  ....

**imap_hi_dependencies.yaml**

.. code-block:: yaml

  (l1b, 45sensor-de):
    - (hi, l1a, 45sensor-de)
    - (hi, l1b, 45sensor-hk)
    - (hi, ancillary, 45sensor-esa-energies)
    - (leapseconds, spice, historical)
    - (imap_frames, spice, historical)

  (l1b, 45sensor-goodtimes):

>       - (hi, l1b, 45sensor-de, true, true, (-3p, 3p))

Reviewer: One possible way to do this:
```
(l1b, 45sensor-goodtimes):
      # Entry for getting the 7 nearest pointings
      - (hi, l1b, 45sensor-de, {required: true, trigger: true, nearest: 7p})
      # Entry for getting the past 3 and future 3 pointints, if they exist
      - (hi, l1b, 45sensor-de, {required: false, trigger: true, past: 3p, future: 3p})
      # Entry for getting the 3 nearest available pointings in the past
      - (hi, l1b, 45sensor-de, {required: false, trigger: true, nearest_past: 3p})
```
